There were some significant changes when Helm 3 was released compared to Helm 2. And when you
browse through charts and blogs online, you may come across either of these versions. So it is
important to understand the differences between them. Now let's look at a brief history of Helm.
Helm 1.0 was first released in February 2016. Helm 2.0 in November 2016, and Helm 3.0 in November
2019. Now since the initial launch in 2016, the project has matured and it got better and better.
The improvements were also made possible by the fact that Kubernetes itself was improving. So
Helm had more tools at its disposal, it could leverage right off of Kubernetes. In our lessons,
we'll use Helm 3, which has a simpler and better design than the previous Helm 2 and is also a bit
smarter. Since Helm 2 was around for a few years, a lot of users had already been using it. But
there are several important changes made when Helm 3 was launched. So let's take a look at the differences
between them. Helm has a CLI client installed on your local machine that helps you perform
Helm specific actions against your Kubernetes cluster. When Helm 2 was around, Kubernetes
lacked features such as role-based access control and custom resource definitions. To allow Helm to
do its magic, an extra component called Tiller had to be installed in the Kubernetes cluster.
So whenever you wanted to perform a Helm specific operation, your Helm client communicated with
Tiller that was running on some server. Tiller in turn communicated with Kubernetes and proceeded
to take actions to make whatever you requested happen. So Tiller was the middleman, so to speak.
Besides the fact that an extra component sitting between you and Kubernetes adds complexity,
there were also some security concerns. By default, Tiller was running in God mode,
or otherwise said it had the privileges to do anything that it wanted. This was good since
it allowed it to make whatever changes necessary in your Kubernetes cluster to install your charts.
But this was bad since it allowed any user with Tiller access to do whatever they wanted in the
cluster. After cool stuff like role-based access control and custom resource definitions appeared
in Kubernetes, the need for Tiller decreased. And so it was removed entirely in Helm 3.
Now there's nothing sitting between Helm and the cluster. Furthermore, with RBAC security is
much improved and any user can be limited in what they can do with Helm. Before you had to set these
limits in Tiller. And that was not the best option. But with RBAC built from ground up to fine tune
user permissions in Kubernetes, it's now straightforward to do. As far as Kubernetes
is concerned, it doesn't matter if the user is trying to make changes within the cluster
with kubectl or with Helm commands. The user requesting the changes has the same
RBAC allowed permissions, whatever tool they use. So that's a big difference between Helm 2 and
3. Helm 2 had Tiller and Helm 3 simplifies integration with Kubernetes by removing Tiller.
The next big difference is a three-way strategic merge patch. The name might sound intimidating,
but don't worry. At the end of this section, we'll see it's actually a simple but very smart thing
that can prove quite useful. Now Helm has something like a snapshot feature. Here's an example,
you can use a chart to install a full-blown WordPress website. This will create revision
number one for this install. Then if you change something, for example, you upgrade to a newer
chart to upgrade your WordPress install, you will arrive at revision number two. These revisions
can be considered something like snapshots, the exact state of a Kubernetes package at that moment
in time. If there's a need, you can return to revision number one, do a rollback. This would
get your package app to the same state it was when you first installed your chart.
New revisions are created whenever important changes are done with the Helm command. For
example, when we first install a package, a revision one is created. Then when we upgrade
that package, a new revision appears, there's revision two in this case. And even when we roll
back, a new revision is created revision three. So that's pretty straightforward. Helm 2 was less
sophisticated when it came to how we did such rollbacks. And when a rollback command is issued,
Helm compares the current chart, which is the chart that has the WordPress image 5.8. And it
compares with the previous chart, which is the chart that has a WordPress 4.8 image in it and realizes that
they are different. So it applies the original chart to revert the WordPress image to 4.8.
Now let's look at another example. Save install a WordPress deployment using a Helm chart, which
creates revision one just like before, then a user manually goes in and updates the application image
using the kubectl set image command. So the application gets updated. And this is done
instead of doing the upgrade through Helm. And this does not create a new revision in Helm because the
change was not performed through Helm. When we now roll back, what happens? As before,
Helm compares the current revision with the previous version. Since there is only one
revision, Helm does not detect any changes. And so it does not roll back or make any changes to
the deployment. So Helm 2 compares the current chart with the previous chart to identify the
difference between revisions to make a rollback decision. And in this case, it doesn't help us
because the manual change that the user made is still active. Helm 3, on the other hand,
is more intelligent. It compares the chart currently in use if we had created a revision,
that is which we didn't the chart we want to revert to. And also the live state how our
Kubernetes objects currently look like their declarations in the YAML form. This is where
that fancy three-way strategic merge patch name comes from. By also looking at the live state,
it notices that the image version in live is 5.8. But the image in revision one that we want to
revert to is at 4.8. So it makes necessary changes to come back to the original state.
Now besides rollbacks, there are also things like upgrades to consider, where Helm 2 was also
lacking, for example, say you install a chart, but then you make some changes to some of the
Kubernetes objects installed. It all works nicely until you perform an upgrade. Helm 2 looks at
the old chart, and then the new chart that you want to upgrade to. And all your changes will
be lost since they don't exist in the old chart or the new chart. But Helm 3, as mentioned,
looks at the charts, and also at the live state, and it notices that you added some stuff of your
own. So it performs the upgrade while preserving anything that you might have added. Well,
that's all for this lecture, and I will see you in the next one.